
TOTP Code Module for FreeRADIUS
===============================

TOTP Code Module for FreeRADIUS  
Copyright (C) 2026 David M. Syzdek <david@syzdek.net>.  
All rights reserved.  


Overview
--------

The TOTP Code Module for FreeRADIUS (rlm_totp_code) registers XLAT expansions
and authentication methods which implement Time-Based One-Time Password
Algorithm described in RFC 6238. The TOTP codes generated by the module can be
used to implement MFA within FreeRADIUS.

The following is a list of differences between this module and the "rlm_totp"
module included in FreeRADIUS:

   * _rlm_totp_code_ can generate TOTP codes using XLAT expansions which
     allows TOTP to be used with authentication methods such as MS-CHAPv2.
   * _rlm_totp_code_ supports multiple HMAC hashing algorithms
   * _rlm_totp_code_ supports restricting the number of authentication
     attempts during an inidividual TOTP time period.
   * _rlm_totp_code_ allows TOTP configuration options to be overridden at
     runtime using attributes defined per user.
   * _rlm_totp_code_ can be used with PAP and MS-CHAP autentication.

If FreeRADIUS is compiled with OpenSSL support, then additional HMAC
algorithms are supported. Currently the following HMAC algorithms are
supported:

   * Built-in algorithms
     - SHA-1 (sha1)
   * Algorithms requiring OpenSSL
     - SHA-2/SHA-224 (sha224)
     - SHA-2/SHA-256 (sha256)
     - SHA-2/SHA-384 (sha384)
     - SHA-2/SHA-512 (sha512)

rlm_totp_code has been tested with FreeRADIUS server 3.2.x.


Module Configuration
--------------------

   * ___start_time___ - specifies the UNIX time to start counting time steps.
     This is the value of  "_T0_" in RFC6238. Some implementations only
     support a value of "_0_". The default is "_0_".

   * ___time_step___ - specifies the time step in seconds. This is the value
     of "_X_" in RFC6238. The default is "_30_".

   * ___algorithm___ - specifies that HMAC algorithm to use to perform the
     calculations.  If not compiled with OpenSSL support, this option has no
     affect. Valid values are _sha1_, _sha224_, _sha256_, _sha384_, and
     _sha512_. The default is "_sha1_".

   * ___otp_length___ - specifies the number of digits of the One-Time-Password
     to return.  This is the value of "_Digit_" in RFC4226. The default is
     "_6_".

   * ___time_offset___ - specifies the number of seconds to add to the
     current UNIX time.  This can be used to increase or decrease the value
     of "_T_" used in RFC6238.  The default is "_0_".

   * ___time_drift___ - specifies the number of seconds to drift the clock
     when calculating the current UNIX time. When authenticating, the module
     will test the sessions TOTP code against codes generated for the current
     UNIX time minus ___time_drift___, the current UNIX time, and the current
     UNIX time plus ___time_drift___.  This option is ignored by XLAT
     expansions if ___try_next__ or __try_previous___ options are specified.
     The value should be less than ___time_step___. The default is "_0_".

   * ___try_previous___ - specifies the number of previous TOTP codes used
     to verify the provided TOTP code when authenticating. This option is
     ignored by XLAT expansions. The default is "_0_".

   * ___try_next___ - specifies the number of upcoming TOTP codes used
     to verify the provided TOTP code when authenticating. This option is
     ignored by XLAT expansions. The default is "_0_".

   * ___max_attempts___ - specifies the number of authentication attempts to
     allow before the current TOTP code is invalidated.  Setting the value to
     "_0_" allows unlimited attempts. The default is "_0_".

   * ___allow_reuse___ - allows a user to re-use an One-Time-Password multiple
     times.  If this option is disabled, then an One-Time-Password may only be
     used once by a user.  The default is "_no_".

   * ___devel_debug___ - enables additional debug statements for developers.
     The default is "_no_".

   * ___allow_override___ - allows TOTP parameters to be overridden by RADIUS
     attributes.  This options allow users to have different TOTP paramters
     which are retrieved from a data store during authentication. The default
     is "_no_".

   * ___vsa_cache_key___ - the RADIUS vendor specific attribute which is used
     as the cache key for tracking previously used One-Time-Passwords if
     ___allow_reuse___ is disabled.  The default is "_User-Name_".

   * ___vsa_time_offset___ - the RADIUS vendor specific attribute which
     overrides the configured ___time_offset___ if ___allow_override___ is
     enabled.  The specified VSA must have a type of integer or unsigned.  The
     default is "_TOTP-Time-Offset_".

   * ___vsa_start_time___ - the RADIUS vendor specific attribute which
     overrides the configured ___start_time___ if ___allow_override___ is
     enabled.  The specified VSA must have a type of integer or unsigned.
     If this option is not configured, then ___start_time___ cannot be
     overridden by a request.

   * ___vsa_time_step___ - the RADIUS vendor specific attribute which
     overrides the configured ___time_step___ if ___allow_override___ is
     enabled.  The specified VSA must have a type of integer or unsigned.
     If this option is not configured, then ___time_step___ cannot be
     overridden by a request.

   * ___vsa_otp_length___ - the RADIUS vendor specific attribute which
     overrides the configured ___otp_length___ if ___allow_override___ is
     enabled.  The specified VSA must have a type of integer or unsigned.
     If this option is not configured, then ___otp_length___ cannot be
     overridden by a request.

   * ___vsa_algorithm___ - the RADIUS vendor specific attribute which
     override the configured ___algorithm___ if ___allow_override___ is
     enabled.  The specified VSA must have a type of string. If this option is
     not configured, then ___algorithm___ cannot be overridden by a request.

The following is a example configuration which uses the default values:

      totp_code {
         start_time        = 0
         time_step         = 30
         algorithm         = "sha1"
         time_offset       = 0
         time_drift        = 0
         try_previous      = 0
         try_next          = 0
         max_attempts      = 0
         otp_length        = 6
         allow_reuse       = false
         allow_override    = false
         devel_debug       = false
         vsa_cache_key     = "User-Name"
         vsa_secret        = "TOTP-Secret"
         vsa_key           = "TOTP-Key"
         vsa_pass          = "TOTP-Password"
         vsa_time_offset   = "TOTP-Time-Offset"
      }


Description of TOTP
-------------------

The Time-Based One-Time Password (TOTP) algorithm, defined in RFC 6238, is a
method for generating one time use paswords derived from the current time, a
shared secret, and shared parameters. TOTP is based upon the the HMAC-based
One-Time Password (HOTP) algorithm defined in RFC 4226.

The TOTP algorithm can be represented as:

    T         = (CurrentUnixTime - T0) / X 
    TOTP      = Truncate(HMAC_Algorithm(K, T)) % 10^Digit

Where

   * ___CurrentUnixTime___ is the current number of seconds since January 1, 1970
   * ___T0___ is number of seconds after January 1, 1970 to start counting step
   * ___X___ is the number of seconds in each step
   * ___T___ is the number of steps since ___T0___
   * ___K___ is the shared secret
   * ___HMAC_Algorithm()___ is a HMAC algorithm function such as HMAC-SHA-1
   * ___Truncate()___ is a function which dynamically truncates the hash
     returned by ___HMAC_Algorithm()___ to a 31 bit unsigned integer. This
     function is defined in RFC 4226 Section 4.2.
   * ___Digits___ is the length of the derived password
   * ___TOTP___ is the derived password


Configuration Options Affect on TOTP
------------------------------------

When authenticating, the TOTP algorithm may be called in multiple passes in
an attempt to validate the provided TOTP code.  The following section shows
different ways that the TOTP algorithm is changed by the module's
configuration options.

TOTP algorithm without ___try_previous___, ___try_next___, or ___time_drift___
options and for XLAT expansions:

    CurrentUnixTime   = NOW + time_offset
    T                 = (CurrentUnixTime - start_time) / time_step
    TOTP              = Truncate(HMAC_Algorithm(K, T)) % 10^otp_length

   * _NOW_ is the current number of seconds since January 1, 1970

TOTP algorithm with ___try_previous___ option:

    CurrentUnixTime   = NOW + time_offset
    T                 = (CurrentUnixTime - start_time) / time_step
    AdjustedT         = T - TRY
    TOTP              = Truncate(HMAC_Algorithm(K, AdjustedT)) % 10^otp_length

   * _NOW_ is the current number of seconds since January 1, 1970
   * _TRY_ is replaced with values between _0_ and ___try_previous___


TOTP algorithm with ___try_next___ option:

    CurrentUnixTime   = NOW + time_offset
    T                 = CurrentUnixTime / time_step
    AdjustedT         = T + TRY
    TOTP              = Truncate(HMAC_Algorithm(K, AdjustedT)) % 10^otp_length

   * _NOW_ is the current number of seconds since January 1, 1970
   * _TRY_ is replaced with values between _0_ and ___try_next___


First TOTP algorithm with ___time_drift___ option:

    CurrentUnixTime   = NOW + time_offset - time_drift
    T                 = CurrentUnixTime / time_step
    TOTP              = Truncate(HMAC_Algorithm(K, T)) % 10^otp_length

   * _NOW_ is the current number of seconds since January 1, 1970

Second TOTP algorithm with ___time_drift___ option:

    CurrentUnixTime   = NOW + time_offset + time_drift
    T                 = CurrentUnixTime / time_step
    TOTP              = Truncate(HMAC_Algorithm(K, T)) % 10^otp_length

   * _NOW_ is the current number of seconds since January 1, 1970


Module Usage
------------

The following is a simple example of a server using TOTP for both PAP and
MS-CHAP:

      server totp-code {
         authorize {
            # obtain the users' TOTP secret from a data store.  If the secret
            # is base32 encoded, set the secret to "&control:TOTP-Secret". If
            # the secret is binary, set the secret to "&control:TOTP-Key".
            -ldap
            -sql
            
            # reject if both Password-With-Header and Cleartext-Password are
            # defined
            if ( (&control:Cleartext-Password) && (&control:Password-With-Header) ) {
               reject
            }
            
            # separate user password and TOTP password, then authenticate
            # TOTP code. The authenticate function increments the failure
            # count and expires used codes.
            if (&control:Password-With-Header) {
               if (!&request:User-Password) {
                  reject
               }
               elsif (User-Password =~ /^(.*)([0-9]{6})$/) {
                  update request {
                     User-Password := "%{1}"
                     TOTP-Password := "%{2}"
                  }
                  totp_code.authenticate
                  if (!ok) {
                     reject
                  }
               }
               else {
                  reject
               }
            }
            
            # modify clear text password for use with CHAP and MSCHAP
            if (&control:Cleartext-Password) {
               # Generate expected TOTP code using XLAT expansion. The XLAT
               # expansion does not increment the failure count or expire
               # used codes.  The cache of failure counts and expired codes is
               # updated in post-auth.
               update control {
                  Tmp-String-0 := "%{totp_code:&TOTP-Secret}"
               }
               
               # verify that an error was not encountered generating the TOTP
               # One-Time-Password
               if ("%{control:Tmp-String-0}" !~ /^[0-9]{1,}$/) {
                  reject
               }
               
               # append TOTP code to end of clear text password
               update control {
                  Cleartext-Password := "%{control:Cleartext-Password}%{control:Tmp-String-0}"
               }
            }
            
            pap
            chap
            mschap
         }
         authenticate {
            Auth-Type PAP {
               pap
            }
            Auth-Type CHAP {
                chap
            }
            Auth-Type MS-CHAP {
               mschap
            }
         }
         post-auth {
            # expires current code if the request was successful
            if (&control:Cleartext-Password)  {
               totp_code.post-auth
            }
            
            Post-Auth-Type REJECT {
               # records failure if the request was rejected
               if (&control:Cleartext-Password) {
                  totp_code.post-auth
               }
            }
         }
      }


Installing Module
-----------------

The rlm_totp_code module must be compiled when the FreeRADIUS server is
compiled.  First download the source code for the FreeRADIUS server and 
rlm_totp_code.

Unpack the source code:

    tar -xf freeradius-server-x.x.x.tar.gz
    tar -xf rlm_totp_code-x.x.tar.gz
    make -C rlm_totp_code-x.x FREERADIUS_SOURCE=../freeradius-server-x.x.x prepare

Follow the instructions for building FreeRADIUS server from source (see below
for links).


References
----------

   * [FreeRADIUS Documentation](https://wiki.freeradius.org):
     - [FreeRADIUS Modules](https://www.freeradius.org/modules/)
     - [List of xlat expansions](https://wiki.freeradius.org/config/Xlat)
     - [FreeRADIUS Development](https://www.freeradius.org/documentation/freeradius-server/current/developers/)
     - [Creating modules for FreeRADIUS v3.0.x](https://wiki.freeradius.org/contributing/Modules3)
     - [Documentation Guidelines](https://www.freeradius.org/documentation/freeradius-server/4.0.0/developers/guidelines.html)

   * Compiling FreeRADIUS
     - [Building from Source](https://www.freeradius.org/documentation/freeradius-server/current/installation/source.html)
     - [Building FreeRADIUS](https://wiki.freeradius.org/building/Home)

   * Standards:
     - [RFC 4226: HOTP: An HMAC-Based One-Time Password Algorithm](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4226.html)
     - [RFC 6238: TOTP: Time-Based One-Time Password Algorithm](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6238.html)

   * Source Code:
     - [TOTP Code Module for FreeRADIUS](https://github.com/syzdek/rlm_totp_code)
     - [FreeRADIUS Server](https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server)
     - [FreeRADIUS 3.2.x rlm_example](https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server/tree/v3.2.x/src/modules/rlm_example)
     - [TOTP Code Module for FreeRADIUS](https://github.com/syzdek/rlm_totp_code)

